v1 of Gatsby core philosophy (#13969)
gatsbyjs/gatsby: docs/docs/gatsby-core-philosophy.md

Fred Brooks wrote in _The Mythical Man-Month_:

> The programmer, like the poet, works only slightly removed from pure thought-stuff. [They] build [their] castles in the air, from air, creating by exertion of the imagination. Few media of creation are so flexible, so easy to polish and rework, so readily capable of realizing grand conceptual structures…

Technology is incredibly fun when we, like the wizard of fantasy, can type an incantation on our computer and a new creation comes to life.

When this incantation is simple and takes seconds, we can easily get lost for hours in the rush of creation trying one thing after another improvising our way to an eventual design.

Developers, designers, demand-gen marketers, copywriters -- every stakeholder in a website project _can_ feel this this -- with proper tooling.

As Bret Victor suggested in _Inventing on Principle_, each creator needs "an immediate connection to what they're making.”

These instant feedback loops are often felt near the beginning of projects. But they can quickly be drowned by project complexity.

Developers can spend hours waiting for deploys, tracking down phantom "tooling" bugs, and so on.

> We believe that with the right building blocks, and an integrated "content mesh system", website projects should continue to feel "fun" no matter how big they get. We believe that every member of a website team deserves the ability to easily see how their work fits into the whole.

Reviewer: Quoted "fun" makes me think of air-quotes. This reminded me of [this blog about unintentionally hilarious uses of quotes](http://www.unnecessaryquotes.com/2015/09/authentic.html).

Also dropped the quotes on the content mesh — we should probably start treating that as a real term and just link to the post for reference.

```suggestion
We believe that with the right building blocks, and an integrated content mesh system, website projects should continue to feel fun no matter how big they get. We believe that every member of a website team deserves the ability to easily see how their work fits into the whole.
```

Author: That makes sense. This is the first use of _content mesh system_, but let's try using it without air quotes and see if it sticks :)

By contrast, by baking in qualities such as performance and security by default, Gatsby makes the right thing the easy thing.

We believe the most high-impact way to make the web better is to make it high-quality by default.

## Gatsby's tooling philosophy

### Bundle the modern Javascript ecosystem for the content web

One key way Gatsby makes the content web high-quality by default is to neatly bundle the modern Javascript ecosystem.

Traditional CMS development [presents many challenges](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/blog/2018-10-11-rise-of-modern-web-development/#traditional-cms-development-presents-challenges) such as walled-garden development, difficult-to-maintain local environments, and a challenging target environment.

Modern web development [bundles advances](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/blog/2018-10-11-rise-of-modern-web-development/#modern-frameworks-offer-stability-and-faster-development) in **performance** (bundle splitting, asset prefetching, offline support, image optimization, or server side rendering), **developer experience** (componentization via React, transpilation via Babel, webpack, hot reloading), **accessibility**, and **security** together.

> Gatsby's goal is to bundle these advances in an easy to use package. We're open to any and all advances being made in the modern Javascript world and would love to incorporate them into Gatsby!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Gatsby's goal is to bundle these advances in an easy to use package. We're open to any and all advances being made in the modern JavaScript world and would love to incorporate them into Gatsby!
```

For more on this, look at [the features Gatsby bundles together](/features).

### Progressively disclose complexity

One concept UX designers use to make applications easier to learn and less error-prone is called “progressive disclosure".

If you were designing a user interface, you might move advanced or rarely-used features to a secondary screen, such as "advanced settings".

Progressive disclosure simplifies the experience for most people without limiting the abilities of more advanced users.

> We progressively disclose complexity by making features such as modifying webpack / Babel config, `gatsby-image` and `gatsby-link` opt-in, simple one-off configuration choices. We avoid all-or-nothing "ejection" scenarios where to add further customization you have to leave the tool behind and manage all complexity (eg, dependencies) yourself.

Reviewer: [Not using Oxford commas is basically illegal.](https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/16/us/oxford-comma-lawsuit.html) 😂 

```suggestion
We progressively disclose complexity by making features such as modifying webpack / Babel config, `gatsby-image`, and `gatsby-link` opt-in, simple one-off configuration choices. We avoid all-or-nothing "ejection" scenarios where to add further customization you have to leave the tool behind and manage all complexity (eg, dependencies) yourself.
```

Author: @jlengstorf eats shoots and leaves

title: Gatsby core philosophy
---

Gatsby's core philosophy can be divided into three parts.

**First, our vision.** Our vision is to _create better building blocks for the web_, and _build a cohesive "content mesh system"_, in order to _make building websites fun_.

**Second, our tooling philosophy.** In order to make website building fun, Gatsby's tooling must embody certain qualities. These include:

- making the right thing the easy thing

> - progressively disclosure of complexity

Reviewer 2: *progressive disclosure of complexity

**Third, our community philosophy.** We can't do this alone, so we're striving to build the most inclusive community on the web. For that reason, we _work in the open_. At all times, we believe, and strive to communicate, that _you belong here_.

## The Gatsby Vision

### Create new, higher-level web building blocks

Today's building blocks for the web are HTML, CSS, and Javascript; `<img>` and `<a href>` and so on.

> We believe that in 20 or 25 years, we'll look back at many of these blocks like we look back at machine code or assembly language today; low-level languages that are great compile targets for higher-level languages that are easier to write in.

Reviewer 3: I think we need to make extra clear that HTML and CSS demand respect because of their impact on users. They can be hand-coded (and likely still will), but perhaps we could say that sophisticated functionality and quality can be baked in to Gatsby tooling with little effort on the part of the website author?

> We believe that in 20 or 25 years, we'll look back at many of these blocks like we look back at machine code or assembly language today; low-level languages that are great compile targets for higher-level languages that are easier to write in.

Reviewer 2: 5-10 years

Using abstractions like React components, `gatsby-image`, and `gatsby-link`, we've begun to craft this higher-level language. But we're just getting started. Gatsby is a playground for discovering new building blocks for the web.

To [quote Alan Kay](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NdSD07U5uBs):

> “You get simplicity by finding slightly more sophisticated building blocks“.

> [https://www.gatsbyjs.org/blog/2017-10-16-making-website-building-fun/](Read more here).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Read more about [/blog/2017-10-16-making-website-building-fun/](making website building fun).
```

Reviewer: I believe this link is backward.

Reviewer 3: haha, wow! That's....quite an achievement. I've updated the suggestion! 😅

### Build a cohesive "content mesh system"

> Over the last few years, teams have begun moving from monolithic, integrated CMS setups to a modular "content mesh". Their key challenge: integrating all these pieces together.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Over the last few years, teams have begun moving from monolithic, integrated CMS setups to a modular "content mesh" pulling content and functionality from multiple sources and APIs. Their key challenge: pragmatically integrating all these pieces together.
```

> Gatsby's goal is to build a "content mesh system" that knits modular, best-of-breed tools in content modelling, authentication, search, analytics, payments, UI frameworks, and so on -- into a unified, high-quality whole.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Gatsby's goal is to build a "content mesh system" that knits modular, best-of-breed tools in content modeling, authentication, search, analytics, payments, UI frameworks, and so on -- into a unified, high-quality whole.
```

> [Read more here](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/blog/2018-10-04-journey-to-the-content-mesh).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Read more on a [journey to the content mesh](/blog/2018-10-04-journey-to-the-content-mesh).
```

### Make building websites fun

Gatsby's vision is to make website development fun by making it simple.

Fred Brooks wrote in _The Mythical Man-Month_:

> > The programmer, like the poet, works only slightly removed from pure thought-stuff. He builds his castles in the air, from air, creating by exertion of the imagination. Few media of creation are so flexible, so easy to polish and rework, so readily capable of realizing grand conceptual structures…

Reviewer 3: I know this is a quote, but can we make it more gender-inclusive by paraphrasing with "they" instead of "he"?

Author: Good point! can do

Technology is incredibly fun when we, like the wizard of fantasy, can type an incantation on our computer and a new creation comes to life.

When this incantation is simple and takes seconds, we can easily get lost for hours in the rush of creation trying one thing after another improvising our way to an eventual design.

Developers, designers, demand-gen marketers, copywriters -- every stakeholder in a website project _can_ feel this this -- with proper tooling.

> Each creator needs, as Bret Victor put it, "an immediate connection to what they're making.”

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As Bret Victor suggested in _Inventing on Principle_, each creator needs "an immediate connection to what they're making.”
```

These instant feedback loops are often felt near the beginning of projects. But they can quickly be drowned by project complexity.

Developers can spend hours waiting for deploys, tracking down phantom "tooling" bugs, and so on.

We believe that with the right building blocks, and an integrated "content mesh system", website projects should continue to feel "fun" no matter how big they get. We believe that every member of a website team deserves the ability to easily see how their work fits into the whole.

When a copywriter edits a headline in their CMS, a designer draws a button in their illustration app, or a developer adds an if statement in their text editor, they shouldn’t have to imagine what their change looks like in context. They should see it -- immediately.

## Gatsby's tooling philosophy

### Make the right thing the easy thing

As developers, we want to build great websites for our users.

However, we face constraints. Clients and employers usually have finite budgets and concrete deadlines.

> These constraints results in our sites being less performant, secure, scalable, maintainable, accessible, beautiful, than they would be if we had more time and resources.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
These constraints result in our sites being less performant, secure, scalable, maintainable, accessible, and beautiful than they would be if we had more time and resources.
```

Gatsby's approach is to create a website tool so that the laziest, shortcuttiest, under-the-gunniest decisions a developer can make will still result in an excellent user experience.

This includes:

> - _great developer experience without sacrificing UX or performance_. Gatsby focuses heavily on reducing the barrier for developers to make good UX decisions by removing the difficulty in implementing them. Things that are typically pretty challenging to set up — such as bundle splitting, asset prefetching, offline support, image optimization, or server side rendering — are all done by default with Gatsby.

Reviewer 4: Are the points in this section lower-cased intentionally?

What’s powerful about this approach is that it gives the UI the ability to “react” to feedback. An advanced learner can ask for more, and the “teacher” (the UI) can turn up the complexity to meet the learner’s needs.

#### Abstractions

The most important concept of progressive disclosure is abstraction.

Put simply, abstractions are a set of default decisions that allow someone to accomplish something while remaining blissfully unaware that any decisions were made at all. When done well, good abstractions are how we make the right thing the easy thing.

If someone wants to change the defaults, they opt out of the abstraction and make those decisions on their own — and this is where things get tricky. To make sure we have progressive disclosure of complexity, we need to avoid a scenario where the abstraction becomes all-or-nothing.

#### How this applies to Gatsby

One of Gatsby's key roles is to bundle modern Javascript build tools. These include React, Babel, webpack, react-hot-loader, and so on.

These systems are incredibly powerful. At the same time, they are quite complex. Users shouldn't _need_ to know these systems exist.

> Instead, their ES6 code should seamlessly transpile into a form accessible by modern browsers. If they want to use Typescript or Reason, they should be able to. If they want to upgrade (or downgrade!) from specific versions of React, they should be able to.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Instead, their ES6 code should seamlessly transpile into a syntax usable in a range of modern browsers. If they want to use Typescript or Reason, they should be able to. If they want to upgrade (or downgrade!) from specific versions of React, they should be able to.
```

> Some "zero-config" frameworks bundle complexity together that is only configurable by "ejecting". The challenge with ejecting is that it takes you from simple to complex as soon as you move out of the happy path.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Some "zero-config" frameworks bundle complexity together that is only configurable by "ejecting". The challenge with ejecting is that it takes you from simple to complex as soon as you move out of the happy path. Gatsby strives to support both simple and complex workflows by utilizing progressive disclosure in its design.
```

## Gatsby's community philosophy

### Work in the open

Open source is at the core of Gatsby’s success, and one of the central tenets of open source is that things are done in the open and without smoke and mirrors.

> One of Gatsby’s core strengths are the strength of its community and ecosystem.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Two of Gatsby’s core strengths are its community and ecosystem.
```
Or if you were trying to form it in the sentence as a single strength, it wasn't adding up (literally) lol.

> We’re convinced that the right path forward is to continue working in the open.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We’re convinced that the right path forward is to continue working in the open with both trust and support of our community.
```

> Anyone can open an issue and ask a question, and we'll respond. Anyone can submit a pull request, and we'll give honest feedback on it. Anyone can submit an RFC to make a major change to Gatsby. And when we want to do this, we'll submit an RFC as a proposal.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Anyone can [open an issue](/contributing/how-to-file-an-issue/) and ask a question, and we'll respond. Anyone can submit a pull request, and we'll give honest feedback on it. Anyone can [submit an RFC](/contributing/rfc-process/) to make a major change to Gatsby. And when we want to do this, we'll submit an RFC as a proposal.
```

> Many of Gatsby's key features emerged from conversation between contributors. If you plumb through Gatsby's ols issues, you'll see discussion of many of the core ideas that led to Gatsby -- from our plugin system, performance optimizations, and so on.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Many of Gatsby's key features emerged from conversation between contributors. If you plumb through Gatsby's ols issues, you'll see discussion of many of the core ideas that led to Gatsby -- from our plugin system, performance optimizations, and so on.
```
```suggestion
Many of Gatsby's key features emerged from conversation between contributors. If you plumb through Gatsby's old [issues](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/issues/), you'll see discussion of many of the core ideas that led to Gatsby -- from our plugin system, performance optimizations, and so on.
```

### You belong here.

Open source is great for developers. It lets you:

> - create a body of work that looks great on a resume or CV

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- create a body of work and experience that looks great on a resumé or CV
```

- build a referral network for paid work
- turn it into a sustainable source of income

#### Barriers to contributing to open source

However, there are significant barriers to getting started in open source.

First, **getting started in open source is daunting**. OSS projects can be intimidating. They often have thousands of lines of code and tons of required context and history. Navigating Github can be confusing. And there can be awkward social dynamics: imposter syndrome and lack of support.

> Second, **open source is an expense not everyone can afford**. Potential contributors may not have free time to work on open source, and their jobs may not support contributing as part of our workload

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Second, **open source is an expense not everyone can afford**. Potential contributors may not have free time to work on open source, and their jobs may not support contributing as part of our workload.
```
I'm so glad you mentioned this!

> Third, many people don’t see themselves represented in open source.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Third, **many people don’t see themselves represented in open source.**
```

For formatting consistency.

#### Overcoming these obstacles

We believe that that these barriers aren't simply obstacles to contributing, they're also obstacles to creating thriving projects. When these barriers persist:

- projects lose so many brilliant people who have so much to contribute
- projects lose an opportunity to add more maintainers
- existing maintainers lose the opportunity to build support networks

> Our approach is to be proactive in creating community:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Our approach is to be proactive in creating community by:
```

> - actively reaching out and welcome new contributors

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- actively reaching out and welcoming new contributors
```

- remembering how steep the learning curve can be

> - invest in community as a primary measure of success

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- investing in community as a primary measure of success
```

#### Community is everything

For Gatsby, the open source community is everything. We want to be the most welcoming, most inclusive, most fun open source community on the planet.

To accomplish this, we follow a guiding core value: you belong here.

Some things we do in order to create an inclusive, welcoming community include:

> - Code of conduct

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- An enforced [Code of conduct](/contributing/code-of-conduct/)
```

> - Commitment to accessibility

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- [Commitment to accessibility](/blog/2019-04-18-gatsby-commitment-to-accessibility/)
```

> - Extensive docs

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- [Extensive docs](/docs)
```

- Friendlier robots
- Implicit trust
- Active gratitude

> - Active mentorship

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- [Active mentorship](/contributing/pair-programming/)
```

> title: Gatsby core philosophy

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
title: Gatsby Core Philosophy
```
